Radar technology may have existed for a long time. But with recent breakthroughs and the increased use of machine learning, radars have proven to be useful in new, unexpected areas.

Imagine you are standing at the top of the Grand Canyon. You reach into your pocket to pull out an old stopwatch you brought. With the watch in your hand, you clear your throat, and at the very same moment that you let the clock start ticking you burst out in a sudden roar. Your surrounding is startled as your voice echoes through the canyons, and just as the echo gets back to you, you stop your watch. From the time on your stopwatch and clever as you are, knowing the speed of sound, you figure out that it must have bounced back from the cliff 451 meters away from you. 

This is the basic principle of a radar – a device that measures at what distances objects are present. Recently, the applications of them have blossomed and today you find them in automatic light switches, in your car and soon perhaps even in your lawnmower.

Starting out as a curious experiment, we discovered that by mounting a small radar on an automatic lawnmower it is possible to determine what kind of surface the mower is moving across by studying what the radar outputs. This technology could for instance put an end to the long, cumbersome wire you may be familiar with if you own an automatic lawnmower. In addition, the technology could of course be generalized to work on for example indoor surfaces, allowing toys and robot vacuum cleaners to navigate their way through your home. 

Although there are other ways of classifying surfaces, radars possess some attractive properties. For instance, did you know that they can see through plastic, allowing us to mount it <inside> the moving robot? That way it is protected from the surrounding rough terrain and sharp objects unlike cameras or probes which have also been used for surface classification. Some radars, including the one we used, are also able to resolve very fine details in their captured snapshots. 

It did not take us long, however, to realize that despite the high resolution, looking at single radar snapshots would not help us in distinguishing different surface types. As it turned out, studying how several consecutive snapshots relate to eachother over time proved to be a key aspect in solving the problem (think of it this way - it would be much easier to identify a surface if you dragged your finger along it rather than if you just put it atop). Manually interpreting the obtained data was impossible, and with the big hype on machine learning going on, it was tempting to approach the problem from this direction. One could think of machine learning as a tool for finding patterns in data that are unclear to us, and just as we had hoped for, a clear pattern was discovered, separating grass from a collection of other types of outdoor surfaces. So far, the model has mainly been tested in terms of answering whether a surface is grassy or not. But we are excited to further improve it to identify a wide variety of different surfaces.






